# The Mentalist

‘The Mentalist’ is an AI chat-bot that is programmed in AIML and C#. It uses psychological techniques that are designed to ‘trick’ the test subject in a theatrical manner. This should factor into the user believing that the Mentalist is in fact human. Some of the Mentalist's tricks may employ the use of non-computer based tools in order to add physicality to the experience. The Mentalist has been designed to remain in control of conversation throughout the duration of an encounter, as to drive the topic of the conversation in the manner of its persona. Due to its ability to drive the conversation, coupled with the created guise in which it will be used, its ability to fool the user into believing that it is human is enhanced, as the user’s attention is focused more on the tricks than on the human-like aspect of the AI. Interaction between the test subject and itself is housed within a console window, which provides a simple interface to allow communication between both parties. It contains a section for the user to type, and a section where the Mentalist replies back to the user.

The context in which a user would speak to the Mentalist is an important factor to its believability and use. The user should be under the impression that they are testing the impact of mentalist techniques via a text based interface. That the user could be talking to a robot should never be brought up before, during, or after testing. Once the user starts talking to the bot, the Mentalist will search within its AIML patterns to try and identify a response for the user input. The Mentalist ‘reads’ the message and then alerts the user that it is replying back, then replies with the identified AIML pattern’s response. The Mentalist’s response mechanisms have been created to reply in a believable amount of time, and use suggestive messages such as 'The Mentalist is writing…’, in order to increase the believability of the Mentalist’s human-like nature. The Mentalist is equipped with the ability to guide the user back to its original train of thought in a human-like way, should they veer off topic.
